UIP 4: Spend Backreferences (#2)
penumbra-zone/UIPs: uips/uip-4.md

| description | Spend Backreferences enable improved sync performance |
| author | Jennifer Helsby ([@redshiftzero](https://github.com/redshiftzero)), Henry de Valence ([@hdevalence](https://github.com/hdevalence)), Lúcás Meier ([@cronokirby](https://github.com/cronokirby))|
| discussions-to | <https://forum.penumbra.zone/t/uip-spend-backreferences/110> |
| status | Draft |
| type | Standards Track |
| consensus | Yes |
| created | 2024-11-06 |

## Abstract

This specification introduces a method to improve Penumbra sync speeds by adding additional data that can be used by DAGSync clients. `Spend` actions will contain a new `backref_commitment` field, allowing clients to traverse their transaction graph backwards and quickly recover their entire transaction history.

## Motivation

DAGSync is a graph-aware fast syncing algorithm. A client, upon detecting a single transaction involving them, can check that outputs visible to them are spent or not. If the output is unspent, then they have identified a live note they can potentially spend in the future, else if the output is unspent, they can continue the process forwards in the transaction graph, until they reach unspent notes.

> The design of Penumbra currently does not allow traversal backwards through the transaction graph, only forwards. A `Spend` intentionally does not reveal the note being spent, only the nullifier that is revealed. By including on the `Spend` an encrypted reference back to the note commitment being spent, such that only the note owner can view it, we enable DAGSync clients to efficienctly reconstruct the transaction history both backwards and forwards.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The design of Penumbra currently does not allow traversal backwards through the transaction graph, only forwards. A `Spend` intentionally does not reveal the note being spent, only the nullifier that is revealed. By including on the `Spend` an encrypted reference back to the note commitment being spent, such that only the note owner can view it, we enable DAGSync clients to efficiently reconstruct the transaction history both backwards and forwards.
```

> The design of Penumbra currently does not allow traversal backwards through the transaction graph, only forwards. A `Spend` intentionally does not reveal the note being spent, only the nullifier that is revealed. By including on the `Spend` an encrypted reference back to the note commitment being spent, such that only the note owner can view it, we enable DAGSync clients to efficienctly reconstruct the transaction history both backwards and forwards.

Reviewer: I think there is a conceptual issue here that's worth discussing at some point in the UIP, namely, that note commitments uniquely identify **note contents**, but not **note instances**. Two identical notes can be created and added to the chain, and they will have the same note commitment, although they are different instances. (This is why nullifier derivation hashes the position of the note, and it's the same conceptual mismatch that creates the faerie gold attack).

In practice, note commitments are _usually_ also commitments to note instances, because honest users should generate random `rseed` values, which causes the commitments to be unique. But this isn't guaranteed by the protocol, and we should pay attention to the implications.

My suspicion is that the note commitment is still the right thing to put in the backreference, but it's worth thinking through the implications and writing that up in the UIP. What are the consequences of non-unique backreferences? Should the backreference also include the position, so that it is unique? (I believe the position is supplied as part of the `SpendPlan` data to be able to derive a nullifier, so I think this wouldn't introduce any new data/plumbing).

For instance, is a tagging attack possible along the following lines:

- User A sends user B a sequence of notes with identical note commitments
  - Maybe this happens over time so that user B spends each of them in turn (rather than having new ones displace old ones)
- User B resyncs, queries for transaction IDs by note commitment
  - Something happens? Or not? Maybe the RPC returns all matching TxIds, maybe it just returns one of them and some data is missing?
  
After thinking about it a little (the time it took to write this comment) I don't think there's a real issue here, but probably good to cover in the writeup.

Reviewer 2: In terms of the graph, you might already have multiple backreferences in a given transaction, so if one backreference points to two transactions, or you have two backreferences pointing to two transactions, the syncing algorithm works the same way, so I don't think there's really an issue there.

I think we just need to make sure to be aware of the non-uniqueness, and not do some kind of clobbering accidentally.

Author: For the transaction ID by note commitment, I think the RPC should ideally be returning all matching TxIds, instead of the most recent one such that no data is "lost" - i.e. the Penumbra protocol already allows there to be duplicate note commitments and we should keep that in mind. User B would continue to DAGSync with the list of relevant TxIds they got for the entire transaction, and from there can recover their transaction history, so I think this is fine. It's definitely worth flagging this possibility in the UIP so I'll add some notes to the Rationale.

Author: One implication is that an attacker could attempt to spam a target user with notes that have duplicate note commitments such that DAGSyncing takes slightly longer. Fees should mitigate that though.

Author: added e04f4885c2be81cb3f6d8b09a4812f72b3adeb70

## Specification

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 and RFC 8174.

### Modification to `SpendBody`

> The `Spend` action will be augmented with an additional field `backref_commitment` on the `SpendBody`:

Reviewer: I think my original naming suggestion was a bad one, because there are really two different things here: the commitment to the note the action spends, and the encryption of that commitment. If we call the encryption `backref_commitment` then we either (1) invent a new name for that commitment [confusing] or (2) have no distinction in naming [also confusing].

Instead I think it would be better to call it `encrypted_backref`, so that we aren't confusing the plaintext and ciphertext.

```
message SpendBody {
    // A commitment to the value of the input note.
    penumbra.core.asset.v1.BalanceCommitment balance_commitment = 1;
    // The nullifier of the input note.
    penumbra.core.component.sct.v1.Nullifier nullifier = 6;
    // The randomized validating key for the spend authorization signature.
    penumbra.crypto.decaf377_rdsa.v1.SpendVerificationKey rk = 4;
    // NEW: An encryption of the commitment of the input note to the sender's OVK.

>     optional bytes backref_commitment = 7;

Reviewer: Unsure if we want to have the field be `optional` explicitly, IIRC we ran into problems with optional proto fields; if the field is missing it will be an empty array.

}
```

> Clients MAY populate the `backref_commitment` field with the encrypted note commitment corresponding to the note they are spending. Initially the field will be optional, allowing for a phased adoption period such that clients have time to implement support for `Spend` backreferences.

Reviewer: Since all proto fields are optional, I think we should be more precise about the validation rules for the proto messages.

Proposal:

- Use `bytes encrypted_backref = 7;` (or whatever name we pick), no `optional`;
- Transaction parsing consensus rules require that EITHER:
  - `len(encrypted_backref) = 0`
  - `len(encrypted_backref) = 48` (or whatever the fixed size ciphertext ends up being)

Reviewer 2: I think we should have these rules enforced, but also interpret the 0 length bytes field as being the ciphertext `[00, 00, ...]`, so that that processing code does not have to deal with the ciphertext being optional, and just have one codepath for if encryption fails

Reviewer 2: I guess that would mess up the effect hash computation though

### Encryption of Spend Backreference

The `backref_commitment` should be encrypted using `ChaCha20-Poly1305`. [RFC-8349](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/rfc8439/) specifies that (key, nonce) pairs MUST NOT be reused.

> We derive a symmetric key $k$ from the `OutgoingViewingKey` $ovk$ using the BLAKE2b-512 hash function and personalization string `"Penumbra_Backref"`:

Reviewer: Can we give this a unique name so we can reference it and include it in the complete Penumbra key hierarchy? What about `brk` (BackReference Key)?

```
k = BLAKE2b-512("Penumbra_Backref", ovk)
```

> One advantage of using a single key is that we can scan all spends using this key without having to do key derivation each time.

Reviewer: Would be nice to clarify this relative to the OVK, my understanding of the design choices is:

- Like the OVK, having a single symmetric key avoids the need to perform key exchange operations
- Deriving the BRK from the OVK is cleaner and provides capability separation (in principle, it allows giving permission to see the transaction graph but no other details)

Does that seem right?

Author: this is correct: I agree that two advantages of the `brk` is it is a key that has a single purpose that can be disclosed to show the transaction graph only. 

Unpacking the situation for outgoing scanning, for each note, we first attempt to decrypt the `OvkWrappedKey` using a key derived from the `OutgoingViewingKey` and the other public fields (value commitment, note commitment, ephemeral public key) prior to doing DH key exchange so we don't need to do key exchange before we know the action is ours. This is also true of scanning with the BackReference Key. 

The other uses of symmetric crypto in our transactions use unique keys and fixed nonces, the difference here with the BackReference Key is that we're not using a unique key per action, and instead are using a unique nonce per action.

Author: added 3d6e49563c01094026cd0096c3f008d90d62e0a0

> A random 16-byte nonce $n$ will be generated and provided as a prefix in the `backref_commitment` field.

Reviewer: How is the nonce generated? From an RNG? In that case, does this change the `Spend` APIs? (Unlike `Output`s, which already do encryption, I don't think `Spend`s currently do, would this change that?)

Since the `Spend` is supposed to be deterministically generated from the `SpendPlan`, do we need to add the nonce there too?

Or, could we (should we?) avoid needing to create a new nonce by using the (truncation of the) nullifier as the nonce? Saving 16 bytes is non-essential, but avoiding having to do extra code changes to the transaction planning system to maintain determinism seems like a win.

Reviewer 2: I think using the first 16 bytes of the nullifier is fine, because each commitment will be guaranteed to have a different nullifier, so there's no nonce reuse between different commitments ; this avoids needing to modify the SpendPlan

Reviewer 2: (This is why, looking backwards, and forwards to when we do end up needing to modify a plan, we should have instead, imo, just included a seed field in a given plan, which could then be used to generate any randomness needed by the plan with a CPRNG)

Encryption is performed using the $(k, n)$ tuple and outputs the 32-byte ciphertext of the 32-byte note commitment, and a 16-byte MAC. The transmitted data in the `backref_commitment` field consists of a concatenation of the nonce, ciphertext and MAC:

```
backref_commitment = n || ciphertext || MAC

> ```

Reviewer: Nit: can we tweak this description to have a precise ChaCha20-Poly1305 call in the spec?

The `backref_commitment` is thus 64 bytes (16 byte nonce + 32 byte ciphertext + 16 byte MAC).

### EffectHash

Currently the `EffectHash` for the `Spend` action is computed as:

`effect_hash = BLAKE2b-512(len(type_url) || type_url || proto_encode(proto))`

where `type_url` is the bytes of a variable-length Type URL defining the proto message, `len(type_url)` is the length of the Type URL encoded as 8 bytes in little-endian  order, and `proto` represents the proto used to represent the effecting data, and `proto_encode` represents encoding the proto message as a vector of bytes.

#### Backwards Compatibility

> The `EffectHash` computation is unchanged if the new `backref_commitment` field is not populated. This is the behavior provided by making the field `optional` in the `SpendBody` protocol message. However, if the `backref_commitment` field is populated, then it is included in the `EffectHash` computation per the existing `proto_encode` method as described above.

Reviewer: Note: this behavior is not provided by making the field `optional`, it's provided by Protobuf encoding rules, which skip encoding default values (the default value of a `bytes` field being an empty array). 

So instead we can say that given that the effect hash is a (domain separated) hash of the Protobuf encoding of the message, and Protobuf encodings are backwards compatible, there should be no impact on the effect hash.

### Transaction Perspectives and Views

The `TransactionPerspective` and `TransactionView` will be unchanged. The backreference is treated as an internal sync optimization detail.

## Rationale

> ZCash has considered a similar approach wherein backwards syncing is enabled using references in the memo fields. The advantage of this approach is that DAGSync-aware clients can populate these fields without a change to the consensus rules.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ZCash has considered a similar approach wherein backwards syncing is enabled using references encoded into the memo fields. Wallets can periodically construct transactions that stuff references to previous transaction hashes into the memo field of the dummy transaction. The advantage of the memo-stuffing approach is that DAGSync-aware clients can populate these fields without a change to the consensus rules. The disadvantage, however, is that the user's transaction history is polluted with dummy transactions, and a client must scan forward to find one of these dummy transactions before it can go backwards.
```

## Backwards Compatibility

> Since the `backref_commitment` field is proposed to be optional, there should be no compatibility issues. The `EffectHash` for a `Spend` will be unchanged if the `backref_commitment` field is absent. Once all clients have added `backref_commitment` support, a future UIP could make the field mandatory.

Reviewer: In a Privacy Considerations section (see https://github.com/penumbra-zone/UIPs/pull/3), I think it would be good to discuss:

- The presence or absence of the `encrypted_backref` field as being a distinguisher for client software, and how that tradeoff was considered against compatibility issues to reach this conclusion

> ## Security Considerations

Reviewer: Not related to this PR, but to branch off: I think we should change UIP-1 to add a "Privacy Considerations" section to the template.

Reviewer: https://github.com/penumbra-zone/UIPs/pull/3
